Hii Everyone in this lecture, we will see how we can reduce the space and time complexity of this program
that we have just done.
Now, the question is, we cannot reduce the space & time without changing the recurrence.
Okay.
So we need to think, is there any other way to write the power function?
Can we break down this function (a,N) and maybe in terms of some other term, instead of saying n-1
can we reduce it in terms of f(a, N/2)
Okay.
So the answer is yes, it is doable.
How, let me just tell you so I can write something raise to the power N as something raise to the power
N/2
And square of this term.
When N is even.
And if N is odd
Then I will multiply this result with another a
Okay when
is odd.
Okay.
So you can easily see if it is like 2 raise to the power 7, then you can say it is nothing
But 2 x 2 raise to the power 7/2
i.e. is 3 and square of this term
Effectively what we are doing, we are reducing a problem of size N to a problem of size N/2
from here we are doing it to N/4, N/8 and eventually ending up at one or zero.
Okay.
Effectively, if we talk about the number of steps that would be needed, that would be log(N)
Instead of doing in N steps, we can actually do this problem in log(N) steps
Effectively, we are going to use this as of a recurrence to solve this problem and let's see how this
is going to work.
So maybe I can say end fast power I get a I get and biscuits will remain same.
If N is zero I'm going to return one then I'm going to check if N is odd.
So if N & 1
That means it's odd number.
We are checking the last set bit, then I can compute the answer for the sub problem.
I can say okay sub problem is nothing but fastpower of a, n/2, and I am also going to square
this up so sub problem square.
So that is going to be sub problem X sub problem.
Now we already know the squared answer if N is odd we are going to multiply the squared answered with
a that is a multiplied by sub problem square and if N is even we are simply going to return the sub
problem square.
That's it.
That is our final answer.
And we are done.
So if I now run this code, cout fastpower a, n
endl and.
We are going to.
run this one so ./power.
If I give 2 and 10, then I get the same answer.
If I give three and six, I get the same answer.
Okay
Both of them are returning the same answer.
But the thing is here, we're taking a less number of steps.
For example, I am computing 2 raise to the power 10
Okay, then it gets broken as 2 X 2 raise to the power 5 and square of this term
We are only computing this term so here it gets broken as 2 X 2 raise to the power square and square
of this term
Okay.
So.
This is written as 2 X 2 raise to the power, not 2, 2 raise to the power 1
And square of this term
And this is written as 2 X 2 raise to the power 0 and
square of this term
This answer is now.
What this answer is 2 and this answer is 2 square
i.e 4, this is 4,4 is added here that is 4 square i.e is 16 x 2 = 32.
And if you put 32 square something something like this.
So that would be, I think, 32 X 32.
That is.
This is 2 square 4
Sorry.
This should be 16.
And 16 square is 256 X 2 is 512
So we are we are actually doing 512.
X 2 that is 1024.
So I hope you're getting this one.
We are we are doing it right.
And this is actually perfectly fine.
But the idea is it is going to take log(N) steps both in terms of space and in terms of time,
though that is an optimization.
And I hope, you now really understood this problem.
that’s it, see you in the next lecture.